Remove alternative attribute sets from HTTP semantic conventions (#2469)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md

| `http.flavor` | string | Kind of HTTP protocol used. [1] | `1.0` | Recommended |
| `http.user_agent` | string | Value of the [HTTP User-Agent](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#field.user-agent) header sent by the client. | `CERN-LineMode/2.15 libwww/2.17b3` | Recommended |
| `http.request_content_length` | int | The size of the request payload body in bytes. This is the number of bytes transferred excluding headers and is often, but not always, present as the [Content-Length](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#field.content-length) header. For requests using transport encoding, this should be the compressed size. | `3495` | Recommended |
| `http.response_content_length` | int | The size of the response payload body in bytes. This is the number of bytes transferred excluding headers and is often, but not always, present as the [Content-Length](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#field.content-length) header. For requests using transport encoding, this should be the compressed size. | `3495` | Recommended |

> | [`net.sock.family`](span-general.md) | string | Protocol [address family](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/address_families.7.html) which is used for communication. | `inet6`; `bluetooth` | Conditionally Required: [2] |

Reviewer: I don't think `bluetooth` is a realistic example here. Maybe just IPv4 and v6? (Only if it's possible to change this here; otherwise it's just a minor nit)

| [`net.sock.peer.addr`](span-general.md) | string | Remote socket peer address: IPv4 or IPv6 for internet protocols, path for local communication, [etc](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/address_families.7.html). | `127.0.0.1`; `/tmp/mysql.sock` | Recommended |
| [`net.sock.peer.name`](span-general.md) | string | Remote socket peer name. | `proxy.example.com` | Recommended: [3] |
| [`net.sock.peer.port`](span-general.md) | int | Remote socket peer port. | `16456` | Recommended: [4] |

**[1]:** If `net.transport` is not specified, it can be assumed to be `IP.TCP` except if `http.flavor` is `QUIC`, in which case `IP.UDP` is assumed.

> **[2]:** If different than `inet` and if any of `net.sock.peer.addr` or `net.sock.host.addr` are set. Consumers of telemetry SHOULD expect to receive IPv6 address in `net.sock.peer.addr` without `net.sock.family` coming from instrumentations that follow previous versions of this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[2]:** If different than `inet` and if any of `net.sock.peer.addr` or `net.sock.host.addr` are set. Consumers of telemetry SHOULD accept both IPv4 and IPv6 formats for the address in `net.sock.peer.addr` if `net.sock.family` is not set. This is to support instrumentations that follow previous versions of this document.
```

> **[3]:** If available and different than `net.peer.name` and if `net.sock.peer.addr` is set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[3]:** If available and different from `net.peer.name` and if `net.sock.peer.addr` is set.
```

(etc.)

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.method` | string | HTTP request method. | `GET`; `POST`; `HEAD` | Yes |
| `http.url` | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://www.foo.bar/search?q=OpenTelemetry#SemConv` | No |

> | `http.target` | string | The full request target as passed in a HTTP request line or equivalent. | `/path/12314/?q=ddds#123` | No |

Reviewer 2: Some clients have a concept of a base/host property + relative target URIs for each request which could be reported separately by instrumentations. See https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httpclient.baseaddress for example.

@lmolkova Do you think it would make sense to keep target as optional for clients instead of defining it only for servers? Otherwise clients will always be able to stitch it together to provide the full URL, so I'm not sure if the split attributes would add any value.

Author: @arminru it boils down to the question if we want to let clients populate url components instead of URL. 

The .NET HttpRequestMessage which instrumentation has access to, only exposes [a full URI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httprequestmessage.requesturi?view=net-6.0#remarks) when instrumentation reads it, but going though instrumentations, most (but not all) of them get full URL from the request. 
There are a few (5 our of 35 I checked) in Java and JS that create URL out of fragments: 
[1](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/e15dbea4a683f3ec5d2b35900f4e9d14f3693227/instrumentation/vertx/vertx-http-client/vertx-http-client-3.0/javaagent/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/javaagent/instrumentation/vertx/v3_0/client/Vertx3HttpAttributesGetter.java#L24), [2](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/e15dbea4a683f3ec5d2b35900f4e9d14f3693227/instrumentation/netty/netty-4-common/javaagent/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/javaagent/instrumentation/netty/common/client/NettyHttpClientAttributesGetter.java#L23), [3](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/e15dbea4a683f3ec5d2b35900f4e9d14f3693227/instrumentation/netty/netty-3.8/javaagent/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/javaagent/instrumentation/netty/v3_8/client/NettyHttpClientAttributesGetter.java#L23), [4](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/e15dbea4a683f3ec5d2b35900f4e9d14f3693227/instrumentation/apache-httpclient/apache-httpclient-5.0/javaagent/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/javaagent/instrumentation/apachehttpclient/v5_0/ApacheHttpClientHttpAttributesGetter.java#L34), [5](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/e15dbea4a683f3ec5d2b35900f4e9d14f3693227/instrumentation/apache-httpclient/apache-httpclient-2.0/javaagent/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/javaagent/instrumentation/apachehttpclient/v2_0/ApacheHttpClientHttpAttributesGetter.java#L30), [6](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/7870e9529f1fc293766357f55f303f889e4154c1/experimental/packages/opentelemetry-instrumentation-http/src/utils.ts#L65). All of them also create scheme://host:port from components too, i.e. base address would also need to be formatted.

If we keep `http.target` for HTTP clients, would we allow to populate it instead of full URL along with other components? I suggest we don't - something in the pipeline will need to normalize this data and that's what I'm trying to avoid with this PR. Populating both url and target would introduce redundancy

So if we agree that consistent data is the right goal, then I don't see a benefit in keeping target.

Reviewer: > something in the pipeline will need to normalize this data and that's what I'm trying to avoid with this PR

I think that's not something we can avoid completely in the end. The question is if we should try to go into that direction, and how much effort we are willing to spend on it.

Author: >  The question is if we should try to go into that direction, and how much effort we are willing to spend on it.

checked what OTLP exporters do (I have no visibility into what happens on the backends), but 3 exporters that happen to leverage URI components have the following logic:

 - AWS XRay - converts components to URL. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/174f4388a25c874329df00d471ccce586452d069/exporter/awsxrayexporter/internal/translator/http.go#L207-L232

- AzMon -  converts components to URL. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/174f4388a25c874329df00d471ccce586452d069/exporter/azuremonitorexporter/trace_to_envelope.go#L263-L289

- Elasic - uses components and breaks down `http.target` even further. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/174f4388a25c874329df00d471ccce586452d069/exporter/elasticexporter/internal/translator/elastic/traces.go#L457-L492

There are two things that happen in each of those:
1. supporting all possible sets of attributes 
2. translating them into vendor schema

We can't change the latter much, but I'm trying to remove the need for the former.

Reviewer 3: > > something in the pipeline will need to normalize this data and that's what I'm trying to avoid with this PR
> 
> I think that's not something we can avoid completely in the end. The question is if we should try to go into that direction, and how much effort we are willing to spend on it.

+1 my observation is that the industry started with unstructured data:

_The string is a stark data structure and everywhere it is passed there is much duplication of process. It is a perfect vehicle for hiding information._

-- Alan J. Perlis

And as the system become more complex, the demand of having structured data keeps increasing.
URIs are well formatted, which makes it trickier. And given semantic conventions are very subjective, I personally would prefer to learn from things that is well established/recognized, and take the lesson from their learnings and feedback from others. In this case, I think ECS sets a good example https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/ecs-url.html and it does allow components.

Author: Assuming we have 100+ HTTP instrumentations from different owners, we need a way to achieve consistency between them. As my investigation showed, even OTel-owned instrumentations are not consistent.

If we allow multiple options, it'll hurt. I.e. if I'm a user and I want to measure latency of my microservices and group them by hostname, how would I write the query if some HTTP instrumentations report `url` and others `host`? 

If we focus on down-to-earth problems like this, we'll need consistency in the spec. Whether it means having pure `url`, components, or both, there should be exactly one set of required attributes.

| `http.request_content_length` | int | The size of the request payload body in bytes. This is the number of bytes transferred excluding headers and is often, but not always, present as the [Content-Length](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230#section-3.3.2) header. For requests using transport encoding, this should be the compressed size. | `3495` | No |
| `http.request_content_length_uncompressed` | int | The size of the uncompressed request payload body after transport decoding. Not set if transport encoding not used. | `5493` | No |
| `http.response_content_length` | int | The size of the response payload body in bytes. This is the number of bytes transferred excluding headers and is often, but not always, present as the [Content-Length](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230#section-3.3.2) header. For requests using transport encoding, this should be the compressed size. | `3495` | No |
| `http.response_content_length_uncompressed` | int | The size of the uncompressed response payload body after transport decoding. Not set if transport encoding not used. | `5493` | No |

> | `http.retry_count` | int | The ordinal number of request re-sending attempt. | `3` | If and only if a request was retried. |

Reviewer 2: Thanks for catching this slipping into common!

Following attributes MUST be provided **at span creation time** (when provided at all), so they can be considered for sampling decisions:

* `http.method`
<!-- endsemconv -->

> > TODO: `net.peer.ip` is not really supported by many HTTP clients and rarely populated by existing instrumentations - do we really need them for clients?

Reviewer: I can say that it is quite useful for Dynatrace, e.g. we use it to heuristically distinguish requests to public vs. internal networks, or to find network-level relationships. Also it is information that can be extremely useful for debugging if you have a hostname that resolves to multiple IPs, and e.g. only one of them has problems.

Author: I agree it's useful, my only worry was that very few instrumentations populate it and some of HttpClients don't expose it at all. I'll keep it as optional (opt-out) with the clarification that it should be added when available.

**[1]:** Instrumentations SHOULD require an explicit configuration of which headers are to be captured.
Including all request/response headers can be a security risk - explicit configuration helps avoid leaking sensitive information.

> Some HTTP headers - `User-Agent` - is already captured in the `http.user_agent` attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `User-Agent` header is already captured in the `http.user_agent` attribute.
```

<!-- semconv http.client -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|

> | `http.url` | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://www.foo.bar/search?q=OpenTelemetry#SemConv` | Yes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `http.url` | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [1] | `https://www.example.com/search?q=OpenTelemetry#SemConv` | Yes |
```
This domain would be made for documentation purposes as per https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6761#section-6.5 whereas foo.bar already belongs to someone else who could put some bad content there or break our spec repo URL checker.

| [`net.peer.name`](span-general.md) | string | Best known remote hostname or similar, see note below. [1] | `example.com` | Yes |
| [`net.peer.port`](span-general.md) | int | Remote port number. | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Yes, if not default. |

> | `http.retry_count` | int | The ordinal number of request re-sending attempt. | `3` | Opt-out. If and only if a request was retried. |

Reviewer 2: Not really related to your PR but just to figure out if you interpret this the same way or if it would need to be clarified:
The first retry, i.e., the second attempt, is reported with `1`, right?

Author: Yes, I believe you're right (examples make it super-clear). I updated the description.

| [`net.peer.ip`](span-general.md) | string | Remote address of the peer (dotted decimal for IPv4 or [RFC5952](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5952) for IPv6) | `127.0.0.1` | Opt-in (and only if available) |

**[1]:** `net.peer.name` Best known HTTP remote hostname is identified according with the following order:

- Host header
- Host component of request URL
- Remote IP address

`net.peer.name` SHOULD NOT be set if capturing it would require an extra DNS lookup.

**[2]:** `http.url` MUST NOT contain credentials passed via URL in form of `https://username:password@www.example.com/`. In such case the attribute's value should be `https://www.example.com/`.

Following attributes MUST be provided **at span creation time** (when provided at all), so they can be considered for sampling decisions:

* `http.url`
* [`net.peer.name`](span-general.md)
* [`net.peer.port`](span-general.md)
<!-- endsemconv -->

Note that in some cases host header might be different from the `net.peer.name` used to look up the `net.peer.ip` that is actually connected to.

> Instrumentation MAY detect it and populate `http.request.header.host` even if user did not explicitly enable it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instrumentation MAY detect it and populate `http.request.header.host` even if the user did not explicitly enable this.
```

<!-- semconv http.server -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.scheme` | string | The URI scheme identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https` | Yes |

> | `http.target` | string | The full request target as passed in a HTTP request line or equivalent. | `/path/12314/?q=ddds#123` | Yes |

Reviewer 3: Fragment (e.g. `#123`) is not part of the HTTP request, consider calling it out explicitly.

If the route cannot be determined, the `name` attribute MUST be set as defined in the general semantic conventions for HTTP.

<!-- semconv http.server -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.scheme` | string | The URI scheme identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https` | Required |
| `http.target` | string | The full request target as passed in a HTTP request line or equivalent. | `/path/12314/?q=ddds` | Required |
| `http.route` | string | The matched route (path template in the format used by the respective server framework). See note below [1] | `/users/:userID?`; `{controller}/{action}/{id?}` | Conditionally Required: if and only if it's available |

> | `http.client_ip` | string | The IP address of the original client behind all proxies, if known (e.g. from [X-Forwarded-For](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-For)). [2] | `83.164.160.102` | Recommended |

Reviewer: Analogous to net.peer.port: I think this must be removed and its meaning assigned to net.peer.ip now, since we want to define net.peer to correspond to the logical peer IP. Especially here it would be important to not fall back to the socket peer IP in any case, to not loose the distinction introduced by the resolution of https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1845

Low-level peer IP will again need a new attribute.

Author: the guidance [now is](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md#connecting-through-intermediary)

> Server semantic conventions SHOULD define additional attribute(s) representing originating peer address for reverse-proxy scenarios when such information is available.

Since `x-forwarded-for` and friends are very HTTP specific, it's nice to have http-specific attribute here and we don't need to rename the attribute..

| [`net.host.ip`](span-general.md) | string | Like `net.peer.ip` but for the host IP. Useful in case of a multi-IP host. | `192.168.0.1` | Optional |
| [`net.host.name`](span-general.md) | string | The best known HTTP server name, see note below [3] | `localhost` | Required |
| [`net.host.port`](span-general.md) | int | Like `net.peer.port` but for the host port. [4] | `35555` | Conditionally Required: if not default. |

> | [`net.peer.port`](span-general.md) | int | Remote port number. | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Recommended |

Reviewer: I think we need to change this now. With the new semantics, of being the "logical peer", it would be the content of the X-Forwarded-Proto header or similar, and the low-level socket port should not be used at all. We will need to introduce a new attribute loke net.sock.peer.port for the low-level port.

Author: I removed `net.peer.port` on the server side. Motivation:
- Server instrumentation could only know the port of the socket peer.  
- Original outgoing client port is not forwarded at all:
  - `x-forwarded-proto` represents protocol
  - `x-forwarded-port` represents original port client used to connect to, same on `x-forwarded-host`. 
  - `forwarded` header does not have port info.

I.e. we only have `net.sock.peer.port`.

<!-- semconv http.server -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Required |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.scheme` | string | URL scheme component. | `http` or `https` | Yes |
| [`net.host.name`](span-general.md) | string | The best known HTTP server name, see note [1] below | `example.com` | Yes |
| [`net.host.port`](span-general.md) | string | Local port number. | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Yes, if not default |

> | `http.route` | string | The matched route (path template). See note [2] below | `/users/:userID?` | Yes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `http.route` | string | The matched route (path template in the format used by the respective server framework). See note [2] below | `/users/:userID?` | Yes |
```
Could be helpful to make clear that there is no common format for this. We could also add a second example with a different format.

| `http.target` | string | The full request target as passed in a HTTP request line or equivalent. | `/path/12314/?q=ddds#12` | Yes |
| [`net.peer.ip`](span-general.md) | string | Remote address of the peer (dotted decimal for IPv4 or [RFC5952](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5952) for IPv6) | `127.0.0.1` | Opt-out |
| [`net.peer.port`](span-general.md) | int | Remote port number. | `49280`; `52197`; `51059` | Opt-out |
| `http.client_ip` | string | The IP address of the original client behind all proxies, if known (e.g. from [X-Forwarded-For](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-For)). [3] | `83.164.160.102` | Opt-out |

> | `http.url` | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [4] | `https://www.foo.bar/search?q=OpenTelemetry#SemConv` | Opt-in |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `http.url` | string | Full HTTP request URL in the form `scheme://host[:port]/path?query[#fragment]`. Usually the fragment is not transmitted over HTTP, but if it is known, it should be included nevertheless. [4] | `https://www.example.com/search?q=OpenTelemetry#SemConv` | Opt-in |
```

| [`net.host.ip`](span-general.md) | string | Local IP address, useful in case of a multi-IP host. | `192.168.0.1` | Opt-in |

**[1]:** Best known HTTP server name is identified according with the following order:

> - The primary server name of the matched virtual host. This should be obtained via configuration. If no such configuration can be obtained, this attribute MUST NOT be set ( `net.host.name` should be used instead)

Reviewer 2: > | [`net.host.name`](span-general.md) | string | The best known HTTP server name, see note [1] below | `example.com` | Yes |
> (...)
> **[1]:** (...) If no such configuration can be obtained, this attribute MUST NOT be set ( `net.host.name` should be used instead)

This row and footnote **is** already about `net.host.name` or am I getting this wrong?
This would make sense if we were talking about `http.server_name` which would be taken from the Host header or target URL as opposed to `net.host.name` which could be what the server sees by itself when invoking `hostname` but with the restructuring here this is inconsistent.

Author: @arminru it is all about `net.host.name`. Here's the motivation: 
 
In current spec we have 3 attributes identifying server name:
- `http.server_name` - primary server name of the matched virtual host
- `http.host` - host header
- `net.host.name` - a bit vague host name (this is what we have in [span-general](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md): "`net.host.name` should be the host name of the local host, preferably the one that the peer used to connect for the current operation.
If that is not known, a public hostname should be preferred over a private one. However, in that case it may be redundant with information already contained in resources and may be left out.")

Thinking about consumers of this data - they want to know the most accurate value and exporters/backends would have to normalize and prioritize - I want instrumentation to do this work as they have the most knowledge, there are also N consumers for every single instrumentation.

So I decided to use the least specific attribute - `net.host.name` as this best available host name, very few instrumentations (Go and JS) populate it, so it's also the least breaking to change it slightly.

Then thinking if should still populate other host attributes:
- `http.server_name` - if it's available, it'd already be on the `net.host.name` and would be redundant if we populate it again
- `http.host` - assuming server_name is available and host header does not match it, those rare apps who want it can opt in into `request.http.header.host`. If server_name is not available, it matches `net.host.name` and is redundant.

So I don't see a benefit in keeping those, let me know if I'm missing something here.

Reviewer: > Thinking about consumers of this data - they want to know the most accurate value

What does "accurate" mean here? There may be different questions that can be answered with different values, especially when (reverse) proxies are involved.

Author: @Oberon00 good question. Accurate - the host name that most precisely describes the hostname that responded to the request. 

- if the client called the app through the reverse proxy, client spans may have `https://host1:port1/path1` url which was rewritten to `http://host2:port2/target2`, the server instrumentation should (to its best knowledge) report `host2` and `port2`, etc. Host header may match `host1` or `host2` depending on proxy (mis)configuration.
- if there are multiple virtual hosts/apps on host:port, this should be the name of the virtual server processing the request. This also usually means different targets, but the target is a high-cardinality field and we'd probably want to give users metrics/queries per virtual host.
  - multiple applications probably fall into the same category (but we don't have them spec-ed out yet)

Regarding different questions: this approach helps normalize and consume data, slightly limiting the ability to debug infra configuration.  Assuming we keep `http.server_name` and/or `http.host` we also preserve current ability to debug configuration. 

Still, this ability is very limited but would mean duplication (or triplication) of host data for everyone. We can also ask instrumentations to populate them conditionally when they don't match the prioritized `net.host.name` so we don't introduce redundancy. Thoughts?

Author: The argument to remove them: if we're not sure if/how an attribute helps, we should not have it in the v1, there is always an opportunity to add it later, but removal is de-facto impossible.

- Host header
- Host component of request URL
- Server IP address

> **[2]:** MUST NOT populate `http.route` when it's not supported by HTTP framework as route attribute should have low-cardinality and path can not substitute it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**[2]:** MUST NOT populate `http.route` when this is not supported by the HTTP server framework as the route attribute should have low-cardinality and the URI path can NOT substitute it.
```

one is at least somewhat confident that the address is not that of
the closest proxy.

> **[3]:** Best known HTTP server name is identified according with the following order:

Reviewer 3: minor:

```suggestion
**[3]:** Best known HTTP server name is identified according to the following order:
```

one is at least somewhat confident that the address is not that of
the closest proxy.

**[3]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies

- The [primary server name](#http-server-definitions) of the matched virtual host. SHOULD only

>   include host identifier.

Reviewer: Does this mean the port should be stripped off? I'm not sure I like that. Also, this note would then need to be added to the Host header as well, I think it's not obvious that it will also contain nonstandard ports.

Author: since we have `net.host.name` and `net.host.port` it's natural to parse authority. It also makes it easy to query by hostname only, e.g. when investigating service-wide issues. Can you please bring up some use-cases where this would be bad?

> Also, this note would then need to be added to the Host header as well, I think it's not obvious that it will also contain nonstandard ports.

Can you please elaborate? I mention that `net.host.name`, `net.host.port` should be extracted from the virtual host config or the `Host` header and set when it's not default - what's missing?

Reviewer: "SHOULD only include host identifier." is not written in that way for the host header point below.

Also, I wonder if that should become a MUST.

| `http.method`      | `"GET"`                                         |
| `http.flavor`      | `"1.1"`                                         |
| `http.target`      | `"/webshop/articles/4?s=1"`                     |

> | `net.host.name`    | `"example.com"`                                 |

Reviewer 3: `host name` here might be an HTTP semantic instead of generic network semantic (at network layer there is actually no `host name` because it is resolved during DNS lookup):

```text
GET /someresource.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.example.com
```

Author: The point I'm making in the comment above (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2469#discussion_r852576400 ) that we need a way to give telemetry consumers the best possible host value as the instrumentation has the most knowledge about it. Host header (if the user wants it) can be optionally populated by explicitly configuring it. 

Also, the static hostname probably should live on resources and not on spans, so I'm trying to leverage the existing vaguely defined `net.host.name` without introducing more attributes and inconsistencies on instrumentation.

| `http.method`      | `"GET"`                                         |
| `http.flavor`      | `"1.1"`                                         |
| `http.target`      | `"/webshop/articles/4?s=1"`                     |
| `net.host.name`    | `"example.com"`                                 |
| `net.host.port`    | `8080`                                          |

> | `net.host.port`    | `8080`                                          |

Author: Here's the delta of changes. **None of these changes are breaking** (except `http.retry_count`, see below).
It requires almost all instrumentations to change, but all consumers, who comply with the current spec fully, should not need to change anything.

I've done analysis of existing instrumentations in Java, .NET, Python, Go and JS (otel or contrib repos) on how they populate attributes to demonstrate inconsistencies and show common patterns https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2114#issuecomment-1079473468. 

There are no attribute renames. Most changes only switch optional attributes to required or remove optional attributes.

## Common attribues:
- `http.url`: 
  - currently common and optional
  - in the PR:
    - clients: required
    - servers: removed 
  - existing instrumentations: 
    - clients: all instrumetnations 
    - servers: most, but usually constructed from components
   
- `http.target`: 
  - currently common and optional
  - in the PR:
    - clients: remove
    - servers: required
  - existing instrumentations:
    - clients: few
    - servers: all
- `http.host`: 
  - currently common and optional
  - in the PR: removed (data now goes to to `net.peer.name` or opt-in header `http.request.header.host`)
  - existing instrumentations: 
    - clients: most
    - server: most, but inconsistently - as URL components (host:port) or `host` header

- `http.scheme`
  - currently common and optional
  - in the PR:
    - clients: removed
    - servers: required
  - existing instrumentations:
    - clients: **a few** set it
    - servers: **most** set it
- `http.flavor`
  - common and optional -> common, optional, opt-out
  - existing instrumentations: most populate it.

`http.request_content_length`, `http.request_content_length_uncompressed`, `http.response_content_length`
  - common and optional -> common, optional, opt-in
  - existing instrumentations:
    - **few** populate them. Uncompressed are only populated by JS, check out all insights here [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2114#issuecomment-1079473468) 
     
- `http.retry_count` moved to client (I belive it was added to common attributes ~ a month ago here https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2078, @denisivan0v, can you please confirm?)

- `net.peer.ip`
 - currently common and optional
  - in the PR:
    - clients: optional (opt-in) - IP is rarely known by HTTP clients 
    - servers: optional (opt-out)
  - existing instrumentations:
    - clients: few, among them Go parses it out of host component (if it happens to be IP)
    - servers: most
- `net.peer.port`:
  - currently common and optional
  - in the PR:
    - clients: required (if not default)
    - servers: optional (opt-in)
 - existing instrumentations:    
    - clients: most
    - servers: some
    
`http.request.header.*`, `http.response.header.*`: nothing changed
  - explicitly categorized as opt-in, current spec already requires explicit configuration to enable

## Client
Sets of attributes (one of them is required):
- currently: 4 sets (url or components)
- in the PR: there is just one - `http.url`, `net.peer.name`, `net.peer.port`, which complies with the previous spec, since it includes url
- existing instrumentations: all populate `http.url`
      
### Attributes
- `net.peer.name` optional -> required
   - existing instrumentations: most
-`net.peer.port`  optional -> required (if not default)
  - existing instrumentations: most

## Server
Sets of attributes (one of them is required):
- currently: 4 sets (url or components)
- in the PR  there is one: `http.scheme`, `net.host.name`, `net.host.port`, `http.target`, which is one of required sets per current spec
- existing instrumentations: 
  - `http.scheme`: most
  - `http.target`: all

### Attributes
- `http.server_name`: optional -> removed
    - when value is available it goes to `net.host.name`
    - existing instrumentations: few
- `http.route`: optional -> required
  - existing instrumentations: most who have it, populate it, but sone fallback to path (which is not right)
- `http.client_ip`: optional -> optional, opt-out
- `net.host.name`: optional -> required
  - it was not clearly specified what goes there, specified it (as best known server name)
  - existing instrumentations: few, it's chosen as the most generic one (among `http.host` and `http.server_name`)
- `net.host.port`: optional -> required
  - existing instrumentations: ~half

> Note that following the recommendations above, `http.url` is not set in the above example.

Reviewer 3: Is this still consistent with the change proposed here?

Reviewer 3: Or this is just HTTP server (not client) so it is fine?

Note that following the recommendations above, `http.url` is not set in the above example.
If set, it would be
`"https://example.com:8080/webshop/articles/4?s=1"`
but due to `http.scheme`, `net.host.name`, `net.host.port` and `http.target` being set, it would be redundant.

## Required and optional attributes

> TODO: Should we move it to https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/main/specification/trace/semantic_conventions? 

> **Required** attribute: instrumentations MUST provide required attributes when instrumented HTTP framework or client implementation allows to retrieve them with reasonable performance. For example, `http.route` represents essential information and MUST be populated when known.

Author: `http.route` is special - it's not always available when server span is started as routing happens later. I can add something like "`http.route` MUST be provided at span creation time if and only if it's available at this time"

> **Required** attribute: instrumentations MUST provide required attributes when instrumented HTTP framework or client implementation allows to retrieve them with reasonable performance. For example, `http.route` represents essential information and MUST be populated when known.

Reviewer 2: Can you think of any way to define "reasonable performance" or should we leave it as-is despite being vague?

Reviewer 4: My impression is that we should define this on a more general level, as it's _probably_ not as straightforward as we may think. My suggestion is creating an issue for now, and discuss it in the next Spec call ;)

Author: > Can you think of any way to define "reasonable performance" or should we leave it as-is despite being vague?

One way I can think about is when library/client/framework calculates the value of such attribute regardless of presence instrumentation. E.g. route is calculated anyway and should never be done in the instrumentation in low-level HTTP servers. It gets very tricky very soon - many attributes require at least a string allocation (e.g. URL.toString), and usually, it's the necessary evil.

I can elaborate on this in the spec, but let's discuss it first.

Author: I added a new file to the spec in this PR which talks about levels and mentions performance, LMK what you think [attribute-requirement-level](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/454f77b8b5e8b36e7335ae0bd3c7216aa59b0886/specification/common/attribute-requirement-level.md#performance-considerations)
